Mars Exploration
https://mars.nasa.gov/

DRAFT Mars Exploration Program Future Plan

NASA’s Mars Exploration Program (MEP) is seeking feedback from the science community for its draft plan for the future of the program. 
MEP is excited to share this draft vision for the program’s future, entitled “Plan for a Sustainable Future for Science at Mars.” 
The plan is intended to look toward the next 20 years and center on community-responsive science themes. 
The draft plan suggests a new strategic paradigm designed to: send low-cost, high-value science missions to Mars at a higher frequency; 
develop new mission-enabling technologies; and address critical infrastructure at Mars. We are seeking community feedback at: HQ-MEP@mail.nasa.gov
 
NASA’s Mars Exploration Program is a science-driven, technology-enabled study of Mars as a planetary system in order to understand:

the formation and early evolution of Mars as a planet
the history of geological and climate processes that have shaped Mars through time
the potential for Mars to have hosted life (its “biological potential”)
the future exploration of Mars by humans, and
how Mars compares to and contrasts with Earth.
The Mars Program goals are directly responsive to the Agency’s 2022 Strategic Plan. They include:

maintaining a continuous scientific presence at Mars
providing continuing improvements in technical capabilities of robotic Mars missions
capitalizing on measurement opportunities that contribute to the advancement of knowledge required for future human exploration of Mars, 
in collaboration with the Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate (ESDMD) and the Space Technology Mission Directorate (STMD)
ensuring that scientific measurements that can enable human exploration of Mars are considered for flight, and that opportunities to fly 
instruments-of-opportunity and technology demonstrations from ESDMD and STMD are exercised on a mutually agreed upon basis
supporting communications activities required for the successful conduct of the program’s core science mission and NASA’s goals for
helping to develop scientific literacy in the nation

The Mars Program derives its science goals from interactions with the planetary and Mars science community (e.g., through 
the Mars Exploration Program Analysis Group, or MEPAG). MEP has an evolving science strategy, with related MEP Science Goals 
that are consistent with the priorities in the Planetary Science Decadal Survey: Origins, Worlds and Life: A Decadal Strategy
for Planetary Science and Astrobiology 2023-2032, conducted by the National Academy of Science’s National Research Council. 
These goals are formed into specific requirements and, as appropriate, applied to the individual missions in Program-level project requirements.

To support an integrated program structure, the Mars Program carries out a number of activities that provide crosscutting functions and long-term investments for the future. 

The Mars Program supports the implementation of large and small directed missions as well as those that are competitively selected and led by a PI. 
These missions have included the Mars Science Laboratory/Curiosity Rover mission, which seeks to answer the question of whether Mars ever had the 
right environmental conditions to support life; the MAVEN mission, which is quantifying the rate of escape of atmospheric gasses from the planet 
and implications for the ancient Martian climate; and the Mars 2020/Perseverance Rover/Ingenuity Helicopter mission, which is acquiring samples to
be returned to Earth by the Mars Sample Return mission later this decade.

The Mars Data and Analysis Program (MDAP) is a scientific research and analysis effort that sponsors detailed studies of data returned from Mars missions 
in order to shape the next steps of the Program’s future-mission studies. Research conducted through MDAP is intended to improve upon open science questions 
at Mars relevant to current hypotheses. Brief synopsis of research funded through MDAP can be found on the NSPIRES website and typing in MDAP as the keyword.

The MEP Advanced Concepts Office conducts advanced studies of future missions. MEP sets priorities for these studies through informal (e.g., MEPAG) and
formal channels (e.g., the National Academies’ Solar System Decadal Surveys). Studies and planning for these missions, as well as identification of technology
needs and investments to meet them, are the focus of long-range program planning and targeted technology investments. Advanced studies also address possible
needs to replenish Mars telecommunication capabilities and other programmatic support (e.g., landing site certification) that may be needed to support future missions. 
Orbiters with these required capabilities and/or other priorities such as sample return flight elements may also provide opportunities to address science objectives.
Missions that address other Agency objectives (e.g., preparations for the future human exploration of the Martian system) are considered jointly with key stakeholders 
from other parts of the Agency. An additional responsibility for the Program Formulation Office is the definition of interfaces between ongoing missions or missions 
in development, and future missions that have not yet begun development. This activity is especially important where Program objectives require coordination 
across multiple projects (e.g., the case of multiple missions cooperating on the return of samples from the surface of Mars).

Other crosscutting activities include overall science strategy optimization, Program risk management, Program risk communication, telecommunication strategy, 
advanced capability development (technology and program infrastructure), interfaces with international missions, planetary protection, and communications with
a variety of NASA audiences and the general public.



